DNS resolution

1. After typing the domain name www.gnu.org in the browser, the operating system
   will check if there are any mapping relationships in the hosts's (/etc/hosts)
   files for this domain name. If so, then the domain name resolution is done.

2. If no mapping relationships exist in the hosts' file, the operating system
   will check if any cache exists in the DNS. If so, then the domain name
   resuolution is done.

3. If no mapping relationships exist in both the host and DNS cache, the
   operating system  finds the first DNS resolution server in you TCP/IP
   settings, which is likely your local DNS server. When the local DNS server
   receives the query, if the domain name that you want to query is contained
   within the local configuration of its regional resources, it returns the
   results to the client. This DNS resolution is authoritative.

4. If the local DNS server doesn't contain the domain name but a mapping
   relationship exists in the cache, the local DNS server gives back this result
   to the client. This DNS resolution is not authoritative.

5. If the local DNS server cannot resolve this domain name either by
   configuration of regional resources or cache, it will proceed to the next
   step, which depends on the local DNS server's settings. If the local DNS
   doesn't enable forwarding, it routes the request to the root DNS server, then
   returns the IP address of the top level DNS server which may known the domain
   name, .com in this case. If the first top level DNS server doesn't recognize
   the domain name, it again reroutes the request to the next top level DNS
   server until it reaches one that recognize the domain name. Then the top
   level DNS server asks this next level DNS server for the IP address
   corresponding to www.gnu.org. If the local DNS server has forwarding enabled,
   it sends the request to an upper level DNS server. If the upper level DNS
   server also doesn't recognize the domain name, then the request keeps getting
   rerouted to higher levels until it finally reaches a DNS server which
   recognizes the domain name.
